Hey everybody, welcome to Data Umbrella's webinar. I am unfortunately unable to share
my video today because it's been over 85 degrees Fahrenheit in New York and that impacts my
internet access at times, so no video today, sorry about that. I'm going to do a brief
introduction and then Thomas is going to do his presentation, and anytime during the talk
you can ask questions, but we'll answer the questions, Thomas will answer the questions
at the end of the talk. This is being recorded and will be placed on the Data Umbrella YouTube.
For Data Umbrella, if you're unfamiliar, we are a community for underrepresented persons in data
science and we are a non-profit organization. This is our team who makes it all happen behind
the scenes. We're dedicated to providing harassment-free experience for everyone
and we thank you for helping to make this a welcoming, friendly community for all.
There are various ways to support Data Umbrella. The first and foremost is to follow our code of
conduct. We'd love it if you could share Data Umbrella events with people in your network and
let them know about it, and we have some open source initiatives as well. We have video timestamps
where we do timestamps of all of our videos and that helps users find our content. We have a
website which is not on Quarto, I'm sad to say, it is using JavaScript, but maybe we'll change that.
We've also had the Sprint website for PyMC and Scikit-learn.
And our blog and our events board is as well open source. Another way you can support Data
Umbrella is to donate to our non-profit. We're an open collective and if your company uses
Benevity for company match donations, that's an option as well. This is just a sampling of
some of our videos on our YouTube. We have a playlist for career advice,
and we have other playlists for data visualization, data science for beginners,
and a lot of open source. We focus a lot of open source and data science.
We also have a monthly newsletter which is at dataumbrella.substack.com. It's really just
once a month if we have the resources to do it, so we won't send you any spam or sell your email
address. We have, actually, I'm going to skip over this one. If you want to scan in the QR code,
this gives you all of our most used links, our Meetup group is the place to find out about
upcoming events, YouTube is our videos, our newsletter, GitHub is our open source projects,
and so on. We use BigMarker for this platform, so at the very top you'll see CC, which stands for
closed captioning or live transcripts, so feel free to, if you'd like to see live transcripts,
pick the language of your choice. I do hear that English is the most accurate, but you can try
the other languages if you like. We have a feedback form which I'm going to share on
in the chat, but if you have any suggestions for future event topics, if you have any technical
issues you want to communicate, if you would like to speak at an event, let us know.
Our upcoming events on July 25th, we're having machine learning visualization using Yellowbrick,
which is an open source library, and on August 8th, Mitzi will be presenting on tracking the
COVID-19 challenge, accounting for missing information.
Today's talk is reproducible publications with Python and Quarto. Tom is a product manager at
Pocit. I actually can't read the rest because it's covered, but for the work, I'll let Thomas
introduce IDE products. He was formerly a product manager in the Quarto team, and you can find
Thomas Mock on GitHub or Twitter. With that, I'm going to hand over the mic and screen share to
Thomas. Thank you so much for the introduction and for having me here today. Can you confirm
is my screen okay? Yes. Great. I'm going to share my slides in the chat so you can get them there,
and then the URL is also here on the screen at thomasmock.quarto.pub. As I mentioned, I'm a
product manager here at Pocit. I manage the Pocit workbench and RStudio IDE and platform,
so definitely a lot of love for the data science community and using IDEs to do better
reproducible data science. As far as Quarto, this presentation will be about 35 slides or slow
and really focused on a broad overview with some deep dives on specific topics, but really doing
this kind of overview of what Quarto can do and how it might be interesting for you. Feel free
to ask questions in the chat, and I'll get to those at the end of today's presentation.
First thing I always want to mention is people may have not heard the name Pocit, but
you might have heard of the name RStudio. RStudio is a public benefit corp, and we recently became
Pocit as another company name as a rebrand, and we are still a public benefit corp. We mainly went
through this rebrand so that people are aware that while we still are investing in tools for R and
tools like RStudio, that for a long time we've also supported languages like Python. That's part
of why I'm giving this presentation today is talking about how Quarto is this multilingual
tool for R, for Python, for Julia, for JavaScript, and for future data science languages as they come up.
As far as what is Quarto, number one, if you've ever heard of things like R Markdown, Quarto
could be thought of as like the next generation of R Markdown, but again this language agnostic
idea. If you were to ask the Quarto team, they would say something like Quarto is an open source
scientific and technical publishing system that builds on standard markdown with features
essential for scientific communication. So importantly this includes things like computation,
so you can use data science languages like Python, R, Julia, or even observable JavaScript directly
inside the notebook document itself. You can also write or mark up or mark down the kind of structure
via Pandoc-flavored markdown with a lot of enhancements that are provided through Quarto,
and then you can create all sorts of different outputs. So from a single source you can create
a document, a presentation like today that I'm giving that was created in Quarto, entire websites,
blogs, books, you know, even manuscripts that you can submit to journals. Overall it's a literate
programming system in this tradition of things like Org Mode or Weave, R Markdown, JupyterBook,
etc. where there's lots of different kind of frameworks and we're trying to add to this
community and combine a few different things where you have multiple languages available for them.
As far as the origins of where Quarto came from, it was an open, it is an open source project
sponsored by Posit, again formerly known as our studio Public Benefit Corp, so if you're
trying to figure out like where we came from that's our history when we were founded
over a decade ago. We have over 10 years of experience with the R Markdown open source
framework, which is a similar system to Quarto but that was very R specific. Overall though this
decade of experience with it convinced us that a lot of the core ideas were sound and could be
applied to other languages. We realized that of course the number of languages and computational
runtimes that are used for science are very broad and it's not just R, it's not just Python,
it's not just Julia or JavaScript, it's some combination across all these different ecosystems.
So Quarto is really this ground-up reimagining of R Markdown, modernized and made multilingual
and multi-engine so that you can use whatever language you want with it
and have a consistent framework that is used across all of them.
Quarto absolutely gets inspiration from R Markdown as well as the Jupyter ecosystem.
It can actually work directly with plain text documents like R Markdown, but we call them
Quarto documents, as well as Jupyter notebooks and the IPython notebook structure itself.
This overall goal though for Quarto is this computational document, so a document that
includes the source code that creates it as well as having a notebook format and a plain text flavor.
We're really big fans of plain text but there's lots of people who want to use say a Jupyter
notebook or an IPython notebook as their entry point into Quarto and that's absolutely supported
as well. And importantly you want to be able to use Quarto to extend further to make it either
more reproducible or better automate and have things like parameterization and programmatic
automation and generation of your reports or documents that you're creating.
When we think of moving beyond just a computational document though we want to
have support for things like scientific markdown. Of course you know you get started in something
like Word and if you're trying to create these technical documents you hit this really big
learning curve and it's it's hard to do all of the things you want to do in a single document.
All of the things you want there or it requires a lot of fiddling so you're like okay well
maybe I'll switch to LaTeX and it's like you start using LaTeX and you're like wow this is
really hard to get started with really really powerful but maybe it's hard to collaborate
with others on. And then you realize that even for something like markdown it's relatively easy
to get started but there's some unsupported syntax that you know you're trying to do more
with it it's not available. So Quarto is trying to get the best of all these worlds of as easy
to use as Word as powerful as things like LaTeX and markdown but in a cohesive format that you can
use across with computation as well. And then lastly there's a goal of this single source
publishing. So at the most basic Quarto can be used to create manuscripts and scientific
communication but you can also take a Quarto document and create again a presentation,
a website, a blog, all sorts of different things and you can use that to have reproducibility
across your publishing pipeline as well as creating useful outputs beyond just a PDF or
just an HTML but really all these different formats all at once if you desire.
As far as what Quarto looks like and getting into some of the meat of it
here's a simple example using some Python code and a basic Quarto markdown document or a .qmd.
On the right before we jump into the code we can see a matplotlib output so this is what the
rendered document would look like in HTML. It's got a nice title, it's got a hyperlink to the
figure there and it actually hides the code behind an expandable section where you can show the code
or hide the code. The Quarto document is actually made up of a few different components though.
So you have the front matter which is YAML markup and this allows you to define things like the
title, the format you want to create whether it's HTML or PDF or other kind of syntax you want to
use and then the specific language or engine you want to use. So here I'm using Python 3 and I'm
using that via Jupyter as a Jupyter kernel to power the document itself. Once you've defined that you
can then start writing your markdown but it's enhanced markdown so of course you can do bold,
you can do hyperlinks, you can do italics and headers and things like that but you also see
here we have at fig.polar and that's actually what defines the hyperlink to this image that's
created with matplotlib afterwards. So beyond the markdown we also have support for computation
via Python, R, other languages and you can write your exact Python code as you'd expect, create a
graphic but then have it referenced robustly by the rest of the document and you have a figure
caption and you have it referenced in the text and you can move across your document as you're
writing and actually incorporate all the different components. But importantly you have those three
structures the yaml front matter to define what is the document I'm creating, the markdown to
actually write your text or your prose, and then code chunks that actually execute code like Python
or R. Now that simple example was only HTML but again the goal here is that you could actually
create many different formats so Cordo as a command line tool can actually take something
from your terminal and you could say take this example my hello world.qmd and render it to HTML
or PDF or docx or epub or powerpoint or a presentation like today with reveal.js. So that
same source could be used to create all these different formats. Of course you can build for a
very specific one like if I'm building a website I can optimize for a website or if I'm building a
PDF I can optimize for a PDF. But ultimately Cordo can convert to any of these different
formats by using Pandoc under the hood which is this document converter system.
As far as what's supported with Cordo it's a lot of different things. So this is relevant to what
used to be possible with our markdown and what's possible with Cordo today. So all these different
formats like reports, HTML, PDF, Word, different types of presentations whether it's Microsoft
Office and PowerPoint or reveal javascript style or latex style, more complex manuscripts or
scientific documents, entire websites, books, blogs, almost all the books we actually publish
here at Cordo are actually made with Cordobooks moving forward so you can actually do
robust publishing of entire books both in print and on a website that goes along with them. So a
lot of different formats you can create. Now let's loop back though in terms of like okay so what is
Cordo? It's all these different things. It's an open source scientific and technical publishing
system. It's built on Pandoc. Ultimately Cordo at the most basic is this language agnostic command
line tool or command line interface. So from my command line on my MacBook or my terminal here
I can do something like cordo dash dash help and say look what can I do with Cordo after I've
installed it. It'll say something like hey you're on this version 1.4 and there's a number of
different commands and I've abbreviated the output here but there's three core ideas. I can render a
document so take a source document and render it to some type of output. I can preview a document
which renders and then maintains a background web server to host the content so I can make changes
save and in real time see those changes affect like my presentation or my report. Or I can even
publish the document and I can publish it to Cordopub which is a free site that we maintain.
Or you can publish to things like Netlify or even GitHub pages directly from the Cordo interface
itself. So it's not just the rendering it's not just the live interface and previewing but even
the ability to publish to external systems. We've even added things like publishing to Confluence for
enterprise usage or publishing to Posit Connect for some of our enterprise customers as an example.
As far as the basic workflow you write your document you might use something like a plain
text Cordo markdown document and you could take something and do Cordo render python.qmd and it
will take whatever is defined in your YAML front matter and convert it to that format.
You can also convert it over to a pdf or you can say oh for this one-off I want to send it to a
different format. And importantly while I've talked a lot about plain text and .qmds you can also take
your existing unchanged .ipython notebooks and render them as well and render them with Cordo.
Importantly there's another option here because Jupyter notebooks can actually store computation
within the JSON structure behind the scenes you can either take the existing render basically the
existing code for this notebook and render with Cordo or you can re-execute it linearly from top
to bottom. Importantly you know Cordo markdown documents are linear and they execute top to bottom
you know cell one cell two cell three all the way down. With a Jupyter notebook you might actually
have executed them out of order and you want to store that as is and just use Cordo to convert it
to a different format like a like a presentation or a blog post for example. And then also the
difference between render and preview for this example is preview executes it it writes the
output to disk but it also maintains this web server so like let's say when I was developing
this presentation I had Cordo preview running so every time I made a change and click save
I can see my results in real time and then be like oh oops I messed up on this part I need to
make my bullet points a bit different or my code didn't execute as I expected.
So there are these different options for both Cordo and for Jupyter notebooks.
As far as executing code Cordo uses Knitter as the engine for R but for Python Cordo natively
executes Python code with Jupyter kernels such as IPython although you could define what other
type of kernels you want to use. So the indicated or whatever the default Python kernel that is found
or bound automatically is used whenever Python code chunks are present and you can even define
a specific kernel via the YAML header. So for this one I'm using Jupyter I'm explicitly saying hey use
a Jupyter kernel and use this Python 3 kernel that has these specific packages that are alongside
with it. And again because Cordo is a command line tool you can even use it from within say a
virtual environment that you've created to isolate your project specific libraries for that document.
IPython then goes through and executes all the Python code transmits it to the output plain text
the graphics the markdown HTML whatever output is necessary and then Cordo bundles it all up
into an output document or whatever resource you're creating. And then for these interactive
sessions where you're kind of stepping through your code interactively like say in Visual Studio
Code or RStudio Cordo actually keeps the Jupyter kernel resident in the background as a daemon
to mitigate the startup time. So basically you don't have to start up a whole new kernel you
can keep the kernel fresh as you're making changes to your document.
Importantly though I do want to differentiate some of the design decisions that were made for
Jupyter notebooks versus Cordo. Although both are fully compatible with Cordo as a tool
there are some differences in how they approach reproducibility or storing computation.
So Jupyter natively approaches kind of storing the source code the output file and any caching
in this single document. So the IPython notebook format is actually a JSON structure behind the
scenes. And again it stores some of the source code alongside the outputs that source code
created. Jupyter cache builds on top of Jupyter to provide transit caching of specific cell outputs
for a document. And if anything is changed in that then it's saying oh we need to re-execute
the whole document. So that's available as well on top of Jupyter and its storing of outputs
Jupyter and its storing of outputs across the whole document.
Cordo uses another technique called freeze. So this allows for a multi-file approach.
Cordo thinks of it as a source code being you have a plain text Cordo markdown document
or you have a Jupyter notebook and those are just your source code. We're not necessarily
thinking about storing the computation inside of that but just that it is the source code
to generate your output. And you might have complete output files something like an html
or pdf that that is your separate output file. And then your computation is stored as a computation
structure as pure JSON that allows you to permanently save and reuse these outputs
across entire projects. Where someone might be using Jupyter someone might be using Cordo
someone might even be using our markdown and all of them can work together to publish a book
or a website together. So there's a couple different options there for all sorts of different
things. Importantly again when we go through this the Cordo markdown structure is a plain text file.
So you have your metadata saying what format do I want to create what is my engine whether it's
R or Knitter or Python and Jupyter or Julia and Jupyter or JavaScript document. My code chunks
in this case I'm using dplyr with R and I'm using pullers in Python to do some group by
summaries of the empty cars data set. And then I have text or markdown that defines like how I
structure my document. I can add an image I can add alt text for that image along with headings and bold
and italics text. So there's a lot of different things here with writing this in a way where it's
still human readable even as it is now but then we'll talk a little bit later about the visual
output you can create in real time in editors such as RStudio and Visual Studio Code.
But importantly Cordo doesn't have to be plain text and if you're a Jupyter notebook super fan
and you like using JupyterLab you can actually use Cordo directly with that. So you can write
in a Jupyter notebook you can add a little bit of the mark the front matter via YAML in the
header as a raw code document and then you can use from the terminal Cordo render to convert
your Jupyter notebook into these beautiful outputs such as PDFs or HTML. We've even released a Cordo
extension for both JupyterLab and for Visual Studio Code that allow you to go even further
beyond the basics and actually add on to the command line interface to provide
editor specific tooling that I'll show here in a little bit.
So for the rendering pipeline you can think of two options here. I can have a plain text workflow
where I use Cordo and I write all my stuff in plain text. It still uses Jupyter kernels to
execute things like Python. It converts this into an intermediary format and then eventually turns
it into things like PDF or Word or websites. But if I know and love Jupyter I can just stay inside
a notebook workflow so I can use Jupyter natively whether a classic Jupyter notebook or JupyterLab
and then use Cordo to render it out and use the existing stored computation from within Jupyter.
So there's multiple options here especially when you're collaborating across folks they
might have differing opinions about what kind of structure they want to use.
So you might ask okay well I actually really like Jupyter notebooks can I keep using them like what
do I do with my existing notebooks? Keep keep using them like you get to choose whether to
use that stored computation or again re-execute with Cordo the document in a linear fashion.
Importantly you know for some folks you might be interactively exploring with a Jupyter notebook
and execute code cell three then code one then two then five then four you're kind of playing
around with it out of order and you need to store that computation to make sure it actually looks
right. Alternatively it might be more reproducible to execute it fully linearly top to bottom to
make sure that if you executed it fresh it would actually work in a programmatic fashion as opposed
to interactive. So you do have this option of forcing execution or again reusing the stored
computation from within the notebook from before. And importantly let's say that you might be
collaborating or you want to swap Cordo actually helps you convert from a plain text Cordo document
into a Jupyter notebook and back and forth and you can actually store both copies on disk at the
same time by defining what the output you're wanting to create is. But you don't again I just
want to really emphasize you don't have to use the plain text if you don't like it and you don't
have to use Jupyter notebooks if you prefer to use plain text but Jupyter is a core part of the ecosystem even with Cordo.
So what this really means is you get to choose and use the comfort of your own workspace whether
that's something like JupyterLab something like Visual Studio Code with the Cordo extension that
allows you to use either plain text notebooks or Jupyter notebooks within Visual Studio Code and
you can even use it within RStudio whether you're writing R code or Python code both of those can be
done within RStudio as well. So we've really tried to invest across ecosystems and across different
editors and not just limit it to something like RStudio but provide these multi-editor experiences
across many different productive tools. We've even invested specifically for Visual Studio Code with
the Cordo extension to actually enhance the Cordo experience make it similar to also what's possible
with RStudio. So there's a lot of metadata you can define within say like the YAML header
and it might be difficult to remember all of what's possible so in RStudio and Visual Studio
Code you actually get rich auto-completion of the options that are available so you don't have to
remember everything you start with format then you say HTML and you say well what's today's date
and you can define the date within that structure and even within code chunks you can actually
define and have auto-completion of the options for code chunks so you can say well I want this
code cell to execute this one I'm just showing off code and I don't want it to execute because
it's pseudocode for example so I can have evaluation on or off or show the code or not
show the code and all these different options that are possible have auto-completion in both
RStudio and Visual Studio Code. And more than that the Cordo extensions for both JupyterLab
and for Visual Studio Code allow for real-time rendering so within JupyterLab when you actually
execute the YAML it'll show you the proper heading as like a heading one it says the author was me
and then it keeps the formatting for the options there and then the code. And for Visual Studio
Code we also have the visual editor that allows you to have a word processing like experience
where you can switch between plain text markdown and the actual rendered output in the actual
editor itself even before rendering it out to a final document. So you can do things like bold,
add bullet points, format, insert pictures and tables, all sorts of things to make you more
productive and of course in RStudio we have a similar experience with being able to switch
between source mode and this visual mode where you have all this word processing that's available.
I do see a couple questions in the chat about scientific outputs. I'll get to some of those
at the end but you might notice that there's some opportunities here to include things like
LaTeX or computational formula inside of the document and seeing those rendered in real
time as well through the visual editor in Visual Studio Code as well as JupyterLab in RStudio.
One of the questions I saw in the chat and I'll repeat it is you know what about the options of
the options of switch between formats like if I'm saying I'm outputting to Word and HTML. Like
HTML is really beautiful and really rich but PDFs or Word is actually much more constrained in what
you can create. So this example I have a Boston Terrier named Howard. I love my dog. So I have
a quick example here of one of the Wikipedia articles about Boston Terriers that I've
converted over to a Quarto document. So of course I can take this article I've written,
I can convert it over to HTML and get a beautiful HTML output. But I can also take the exact same
document and convert it to PDF and it also looks like a really good PDF. I can further optimize
for either of those formats but I can actually create these really beautiful outputs from this
exact same source code. So here's the output of my Boston Terrier article that is copied verbatim
from Wikipedia in HTML. I've got nice hover text, I've got citations, I've got a scrollable table of
contents, graphics in the sidebar and descriptions of those, alternative text, all these great things.
I really love this article. But then someone says hey you know I'm offline I need to actually print
out the PDF or take a look at it. Can you render a PDF for me as well? From the exact same source
code I can create a PDF version that still has the citations and the rich text and the
structure of the document using the same source code. So from the exact same document you can
output to different formats and have a really really nice output. So this is something really
motivating for me because I like generating HTML. I don't love creating PDFs but some people need
them or have to use them. So Cordo can make it easy to render to different outputs all from the
same thing. There's even a format called Cordo Manuscripts that I'll kind of share some of that
at the very end on the Cordo website because it's brand new. But it allows you to keep the source
documents as well as a PDF as well as an HTML and even this kind of JAX format where you can take
the entire bundle of reproducibility and submit it to a journal. So that whole pipeline is where
we're trying to get to of like you don't just have the PDF that's on you know the scientific
publication or in the journal but you can also maintain a really nice HTML output that goes along
with your kind of PDFs or your Word documents that are going out. Again when you're writing
this syntax I'll give you a couple examples of how we share formatting and syntax across both
markdown and code. But let's say I wanted to create two images side by side with a quick kind
of what is this. So I can take a Pandoc div here. Let me zoom in a little bit. And I can say hey for
these two elephants that are historically known and written about lay them out with two columns
and put them side by side. And I take these images on disk and I can create this kind of two column
layout of the images. But that same syntax also applies to dynamically created graphics in Python
or R. So here I'm using the plot 9 library in Python which is almost one-to-one with ggplot
from R. And importantly I create two separate graphics plot 1 and plot 2. I use the same layout
dash number of columns equals 2 and it actually puts them side by side. And it actually injects
the figure captions appropriately. So this is a scatter plot. This is a box plot. Even though these
were generated on the fly I'm able to mark them up in a scientific format way or in a reporting way
on the fly. So you can share the syntax across all the different structures that you're doing.
And ultimately what we're trying to do here is provide as much built-in markdown centric
format agnostic syntax as possible as we've shown a little bit in the previous slides. Like we don't
want you to have to go off and create all this custom stuff. We want to bake all that in batteries
included. So Cordo bundles Bootstrap as these really rich CSS themes for HTML. I respect SAS
variables for even more robust styling dynamically across all the HTML formats. So documents, websites,
books, slides. It also includes LaTeX templates for specific journals where again you don't have
to figure out how to write raw LaTeX. You can just take the Cordo markdown, use this specific
template from this journal from LaTeX, and it will generate the correct PDF output for you
even if you didn't know what LaTeX was. So you can again create these different multi-formats for
specific journals. We've already had lots of people using those templates and adding to the templates
over time for their specific journals. And again Cordo also respects Microsoft Office templates. So
things like DocX or PowerPoint where you can use a corporate theme allowing you to style the
document robustly without having to inject weird XML inside the document. Although you can kind of
generate an intermediary markdown or LaTeX or XML outputs that you can then play with more
in downstream formats. Ultimately you shouldn't have to escape out to writing raw LaTeX HTML using
Jinja templates or anything like that. You can rely purely on the Cordo markdown syntax, but if
you really really want to optimize for a single format you can use a template or you can even
include your raw content to further style it and optimize for one specific format if that's the way
you want to go about it. And we've even included the ability to extend Cordo with open source
extensions from the community and from us as well. So you might have things like short codes where you
can inject like social media short links or you can add emoticons or other different
things like that. You can apply filters that change the styling of specific items. So you can make your
code chunks say, hey I'm referencing this file on disk. Make it look like I'm actually reading from a
file and then printing the code. Or you can even define your entirely new format. So for my company
I want to create a presentation format using reveal.js and I want to make it where every time
I use those slides that it looks appropriate for my organization. So there's a lot of ability to
further enhance Cordo and then share those open source extensions with the community.
I want to close out with two things and then we'll get into questions, but
I also want to call out that Cordo with HTML fully supports interactivity. So you can use
Python packages or R packages to embed interactive graphics like Plotly and actually have those be
fully interactive in both presentations as well as in websites or blogs. But even more than that
we actually embed a version of JavaScript called observable JavaScript that allows you to define
net new interactivity on the fly. So here I have something that looks pretty similar to something
like a Shiny application or even like a Streamlit application where you have like a graphic and then
there's a little slider bar here and in real time I can modify the filtering step I want to do and
show different things in my graphic and have it update in real time. And this also applies to
tables where I can affect the table as well as a graphic in real time through these different
components. And this is done through of course IPython widgets or Jupyter widgets as well as
this ability to do it directly through JavaScript. So these on-the-fly widgets I want to talk about
maybe something simple like this where I say oh it's 34 degrees Celsius what does that actually
mean for me because I'm weird and American and I use Fahrenheit. So I know Reshma was saying it's
about 85 degrees Celsius in New York which is about 30 degrees Celsius in the rest of the modern world
or I can say well in Texas it's about 102 which is 39 degrees Celsius. So in real time I can have
my document editable by the end user without having them to write our Python code on top of it.
Now this actually is pretty simple to do. I can use a OJS or observable JavaScript chunk
and then define an input dot range so 0 to 100 step with a unit of 1 the default was 34
and then say that it shows degrees Celsius which is this HTML code. And then I can say for the
output in the body of my document output the temperature and the Fahrenheit and have those
update in real time depending upon the temp that is changing up here. So just really want to call
out that if you see something that you want to do that's custom beyond what's available
in Jupyter widget you can build these widgets on the fly and actually embed them into the body of
your document and not just be stuck within a code chunk. So really really cool additional feature.
Very last thing I'll talk about and we'll get into some summaries but
while you can create this one source and create many different formats you can also take one
source and create many different outputs. So from the same document I might show results for
New York and for Texas so a report for Ishma and a report for me or I can run a report for 2022
versus 2023. Or I might just rerun a single analysis with different parameters for different
assumptions that I'm doing for my analyses. And I can do these parameterized outputs in both Python
and R. So for Jupyter I use a paper mill style tag system where I can define specific tags
as these parameters and do things like alpha or ratio that are then available at the top level
environment. So they're actually defined for the rest of it but I can define them via Cordo and
change them at the rendering process later on. And then for R you can define them in the YAML header
and they're actually stuck within a params list object so they're not pulled out into the top
level environment. But again importantly in both Python and R there's these rich support for
parameterization of your documents. What this looks like in practice is at the Cordo render step you
might say Cordo render my notebook with these parameters and I can change the alpha value or
the ratio value for my graphic or for my machine learning pipeline in real time just by re-rendering
the exact same document. Or for more complex pipelines I can actually use an external YAML
file that defines you know many different parameters all at once. So you can imagine I have
a lot of different things that are changing across a long document and I can actually generate many
different versions of the same report from the same source code with different outcomes based
upon changing these whole host of parameters. So this was a really broad overview of what Cordo
can do for you. Hopefully some of that is motivating and I know there's some questions in
the chat we'll get to here in a little bit. Last thing I want to call out is for publishing. You
can also publish Cordo documents and Cordo outputs to a number of different places. So Cordo Pub
is a free resource that we provide. You can sign up for it at Cordo.pub and you can publish like a
blog or different HTML outputs there. But we also have support for publishing directly to things
like GitHub Pages or to Posit Connect one of our commercial products or to Netlify for more robust
presentations. Ultimately I just want to say that Cordo being an open source product is crafted with
a lot of love and care and we really thank the community and all the different contributors
and open source projects that help build this out. So thank you to everyone for allowing us
to kind of aggregate all these different wonderful things. And if you do have feedback you can always
go to github.com slash Cordo dash dev slash Cordo dash CLI and you can submit issues or
feature requests there and commit or contribute to the open source project.
As far as some resources I think in general Cordo.org is the best resource. That's actually
all of the kind of public documentation and you can go there to learn even more and get started
with installing it inside your system and working with it. There are some videos that are linked to
a webinar style. If you go to thomasmock.cordo.pub slash python dash umbrella for the actual URL
you'll actually be able to see and I'll drop that into the chat again. You can see these resources
and interact with this to click on the links. With all that I do want to answer a few of the
questions so I'm going to read those out loud and then answer them as best I can. So a question from
Moni, thank you for this one. Can Cordo documents be shared like Overleaf documents and related to
that can users import article templates for specific journals into Cordo? So you can use
these specific journal templates. If I go to the Cordo website, I go to guide, go to
all formats, trying to think of where, scholarly writing. There's a whole section on using scholarly
writing or publishing for specific journals, specifically like to publish to, trying to think
of which one this is for, the journal psychoceramics, which is, that's an interesting one,
that's exciting, about silly string theory. It shows an example of that and if I go to journal,
so journal articles talks about some of the supported formats, so ACM, PLOS, ASA, Elsevier,
a lot of different ones and if you don't see one that you'd like, you can actually open an issue
and we can work on adding that template, working with the downstream journal themselves because
often they create a LaTeX template that we then bundle and make work with Cordo so that you can,
again, not have to write all this LaTeX to generate a PDF but rather just deliver a Cordo
document or a bundle. I also want to call out that this is relatively new but I think manuscript,
I think it's here, there's a new manuscript option that, again, is the bundling of the
entire project together where you might have HTML output, some Jupyter notebooks,
some Cordo documents, and a PDF that generates an entire website and that entire bundle can be
shipped off to a journal. So some of that might actually be in the release notes for the pre-release
because it's brand new. So Cordo manuscripts, if I go to get started, more pre-release, there's a
Cordo manuscripts page that, again, includes the other formats where you're generating Word, PDF,
as well as this Mecca bundle that's kind of the aggregation of all the resources
and then you have the source notebooks that actually generated this manuscript
and you can link out to external resources like a GitHub repository that has the live source code
there as well. So again, we're really working towards this future of like robust scientific
publishing via Cordo. A great question from Wasani which is, is it Git-friendly? I think that's an
important aspect of plain text versus Jupyter is at the basic level plain text operates really,
really well with source control like Git. Jupyter notebooks and the JSON can be a bit trickier
to work with source code, but there are some extensions that allow you to use source code
like Git and GitHub with Jupyter notebooks. But at a basic level, the way I like to think about it
is plain text will work for sure. You can make line-by-line changes without changing the entire
structure. So it's a really robust option, especially when you're collaborating via source control.
A question from Jordi is, has Cordo already been used in published scientific work? There are some
gallery examples. So on cordo.org under gallery, you can see there's a lot of different things
for articles and reports. I think some of these include some presentations and other
scientific articles, but this would be a good resource for seeing how you might get started.
And there's even community resources. I want to say there's a lot of blogs and places here,
some books that we have published or are working on publishing via Cordo in Python and R.
So there's a lot of resources here to see how others have approached using Cordo
for really, really robust outputs and entire books that are used for classes,
for physical publication, even some of the books I have on my shelf written that way.
A question from Corey, any general suggestions for outputting to Docx? HTML provides such a
rich output, but the Word output can be more difficult to achieve. So importantly, I talked
a little bit about that when I was showing the PDF versus the HTML output, but with the guide,
you can actually see documents and then Microsoft Word and Word templates. By referencing this
external reference doc that defines all of your styles, you can again use that to define all of
the XML that's specific for Word. And you don't have to think about XML, but you're really creating
like a Word template that Cordo then knows how to respect. And similarly for HTML, your source
document in Cordo could be the same for HTML and for Word, but they could look vastly different
because you're using a different way of theming it or reference template.
Another question from Jung Yoon, thank you for the presentation. Could you provide any tips on
how Cordo can help a user who heavily uses the Conda environment on a supercomputer?
Can Cordo have the ability to see the output on the command line? I think there actually is a
markdown format where you can kind of, you can always print the raw output as like a cat function
to print it at the terminal, as opposed to writing it out to a text file. But importantly,
you know, there are some tools for things like Slurm or other high-performance computing
environments where you could, you know, write things that are in Visual Studio Code or Workbench.
Like that's one of the things we do with Posit Workbench is integrate with Slurm and Kubernetes.
And you can actually author directly in RStudio or JupyterLab or Visual Studio Code,
then executes the document remotely in the high-performance computing cluster and brings it
back. A question from Liz about GitHub Actions and using those with Cordo. So you can use GitHub
Actions or other continuous integrations with Cordo. So I'm just using the search here on the
website to move around quickly, but you can publish to something like GitHub and then use Cordo render
within a GitHub Action to actually re-execute the code. Or in some examples, use the stored
frozen computation, but build a website. You could imagine my collaborators are building a Jupyter
Notebook. I'm using Cordo document. We hand off the code in the middle and we don't want to re-execute
it because it was executed locally, but we just want to build it into a website like this. And
that's an example where continuous integration allows for local execution or for actually
re-executing it all the way inside continuous integration. So there's a couple of different
options depending upon do you want to re-execute R and Python, or do you want to execute locally
and just render remotely? So a couple options there. A question from Ruhail, which is,
is it possible to have a website where we have Cordo documents representing the posts?
But I was wondering if it's possible to have individual environments attached to each blog
post with RN, Verconda, or other virtual environments. So yes, you can have, there's
a virtual environment section on Cordo that allows you to talk about folder specific libraries. You
can imagine that for a blog, what you actually have is a structure of the project route. And then
within each blog post, you have a specific folder for that blog post. So you can actually
define a project specific library via something like RN or Virtualenv or even Conda, I believe,
at the project or folder specific level that then allows you to have reproducible individual blog
posts. To take a step back though, you don't have to use that. And you could use managing execution
via freeze that allows you to, again, store the computation locally. And even when you're
rebuilding your entire blog, you don't have to re-execute code from four years ago, but you can
just execute the most recent document. This is what I use for my personal blog. So if I were to go to
like the mockup.blog, I've got a lot of blog posts. And if I go to the oldest one from 2018,
every time I publish a new blog post, I don't want to re-execute this code from five years ago.
I can just reuse that frozen computation and then it aggregates that into the overall blog itself.
So even when I'm adding to this and doing more stuff and more blogging, I'm not having to
potentially break my website or have to figure out how to manage old code. I just store the output
from those in the past. I think that was all the questions. We've got about 10 minutes remaining.
So if you do have other Q&A, feel free to throw that into the question and answer. I'll check out
the chat real quick. Thank you for suggesting read the Q&A. I moved over to there. But yeah,
let me know if you have other questions. And again, I think the best resource is number one,
my slides are publicly available and they'll be up forever. And then Cordo.org has a whole host
of documentation for all the languages that are supported out of the box. So Python, R, Julia,
observable JavaScript. And if you go to the guide or getting started, you can say, hey,
I want to download this CLI and install it for my specific operating system. And then you say, well,
what is the editor I want to use? Maybe I want to use a text editor in the command line. I can use
that. Maybe I'm a Jupyter user or Studio, Visual Studio Code. And if I click into that, it actually
walks through creating a basic document, getting started, how computations work, installing packages
and libraries, and the whole process of working with that. So a nice friendly getting started
page. Then the guide goes into as much detail as you could ever imagine on all the different options.
Or as you saw me using the search bar up here, if I'm thinking of something like GitHub Actions,
I can see, oh, there's a lot of different opportunities for GitHub Actions for
like publishing. And I can go read about that specific topic without having to navigate the
file directory. I think that's the bulk of it. But again, I'm around for a few more minutes.
And I'm going to just hang out and kind of talk for a little bit more. So if you have
other questions, please ask them in Q&A. And thank you so much for the time today.
The gallery as well as a real good resource for looking at like examples of what others have done.
And especially around like, I want to create HTML or PDF or these different presentations,
you can get some kind of exposure to how others have approached it. This was a really fun one I
did with the Apache Arrow project around using it for really big data sets, for example.
And I'll show up some pictures of Boston Terriers because that's always a good call.
And I love Boston Terriers. So you can find examples of different presentations from
the Cordo.org website itself. And even for some of the personal blogs or professional blogs like
the NBDev project from Fast.ai. They've standardized around Jupyter Notebooks for a long time.
But they've recently started using Cordo to build websites and some of the documentation
hosted via Cordo. So even the broader open source community is building on and around
some of the use of open source products like Cordo in conjunction with Jupyter and GitHub and
other applications. So for example, like their blog here is a Cordo blog. You can see all the
different options around it. They have a nice article about using NBDev with Jupyter with Cordo,
which again is impactful for using Jupyter with version control. They've actually done a lot of
work on making that better and able to safely check Jupyter Notebooks into version control.
Or you could use the Cordo plain text markdown documents as well.
All right. I don't see any other questions. I'm going to pause for a little second, get a drink
of water. But if others have questions, feel free to ask them in the chat.
I'll go back to Cordo.org. The last thing I'll call out is with the Cordo blog. So again,
Cordo.org blog. We talk about a little bit more about like new things as they come out.
And so you can see embedding or multi-format publishing, some of the exciting things as
they come out summarized as opposed to reference documentation. And importantly, especially for
if you're developing Shiny applications with Python, there's even support for Shiny Live,
which is a Wasm or WebAssembly implementation of Shiny in Python that can be embedded into Cordo
documents where you can actually have interactive applications hosted directly inside your
documents. So this will load for a second. And I can have, again, these real-time ability to
modify components and develop Shiny applications that are then hosted within a Cordo document or
a Cordo website. So some really, really cool things that they're working on. I really like keeping up
with them through the Cordo blog, as well as just checking in on the getting started release notes.
You can always see the pre-release and they have some information they're doing around support for
other formats. Or again, I think the Cordo manuscripts is something that's really, really
cool. It's in pre-release for 1.4, but this really robust bundle of assets for robust publishing
and that it's supported across the major editors. So JupyterLab, Visual Studio Code, and RStudio
and across document types. So Jupyter Notebooks, as well as Cordo documents,
really kind of building upon this scientific publishing and communication aspect.
I think Reshma is having a little bit of internet trouble. So I just messaged her, but I think,
oh, here we go. How can I use Cordo to write scientific papers? So there's a nice section on
the guide. If you go to authoring here and then scholarly writing,
it talks a little bit about using things like bibliographies or references and how you can
embed those in the text and have things like hover text for specific articles in the HTML,
or even in the PDF output, having the nice hyperlink to those. It talks a little bit
about cross references, where you might define a figure in maybe the first few pages, and then
you can reference that figure much later in the document and have it actually link back to the
original figure, as well as things like writing LaTeX for formula or theorems and proofs and
having those robust to mathematical syntax inside the document itself. For some of the books and
other more complex things, some of that also plays in. But especially for those types of actually
doing scientific writing, the scholarly writing section is really great. It's a good start.
I will go back, and there's even some information around citations, and you can have a reference to
your affiliation, where you're coming from, URL to your site, and have the citation example where
you have like a bibliography example for the article you just wrote, as well as other more
complicated kind of structures where you're using Google Scholar or different citation options.
All right, well, thank you so much for the time today. It looks like Rishma asked me to just
close this out, and she's going to use that to close out today, but we're all wrapped up. Feel
free to reach out to me. I'm on Twitter, I guess a little bit, although mostly on Fostedon or on
Threads at this point as we kind of figure out where the data community is moving to and kind
of standardize it around. But feel free to reach out any time, and make sure to check out the
cordo.org documentation. Thanks so much to Data Umbrella for having me today and for y'all for
attending. I'll see you next time. Thank you so much. I'm going to close this out and then close,
exit the webinar, and thank you, and have a great week.